
ERRATA.


Since the printing of this book it has come to my knowledge that
comrade James C. Carleton, secretary of the National Association of
Mexican War Veterans of Bedford, Indiana, under-ranks me in age 14
days. He was born on the 17th of June, 1832, while I saw the light
first on the 3rd of June of the same year. This knocks the conceit out
of me as to being the youngest veteran of the Mexican War, and I take
my hat off to my dear young comrade Carleton, late of the 5th Regiment
Indiana Volunteers, Colonel Lane, and I am relegated to a back seat.

I hope my dear comrade will live to see his 100th birthday, and that he
may never die till I kill him, and when he is called away at the last
tattoo, may every hair of his head be converted into an electric light
to illumine his march to glory.

  _CJMurphy_




[Illustration: COLONEL DANIEL E. HUNGERFORD]




  (COPYRIGHTED)

  CONDENSED HISTORY
  of the
  Mexican War
  and its glorious results

  By Hon. WILLIAM McKAY
  of the Palmetto Regiment in Mexico, also Reminiscences
  of the War by

  Colonel DANIEL E. HUNGERFORD,
  of Rome (Italy), Captain in the 2nd New York Regiment
  in the Mexican War, and latterly in command of the
  36th Regiment New York Volunteers in the War
  of the Rebellion,
  (Father of Mrs. John W. Mackay, of Nevada, now of London)

  and Colonel CHAS. J. MURPHY,
  of Brussels (Belgium)

  the well-known Corn Propagandist, and one of the only two
  officers who won the Congressional Medal of Honor (a distinction
  which ranks with the cross of the Legion of Honor of France,
  and the Victoria Cross of England) in the first general battle of
  the War, Bull Run, and the youngest survivor now living of
  the soldiers in the Mexican War.

  Compiled and Published
  by JOHN E. COWAN, 122, West 93rd Street, New York

  PRICE: 25 CENTS

  FIRST EDITION 25,000




HISTORY OF THE MEXICAN WAR

by the Hon. WILLIAM McKAY


Comrades and welcome Guests:

It has been the custom of veterans of the war with Mexico to celebrate
the fall of the capital of that Republic before the prowess of American
soldiers on the 14th day of September, 1847.

Hence are assembled around this festive board in this magnificent Hotel
Continental the few veterans of that war whose far-wandering footsteps
have brought them to the “elbow-touch” once more on a foreign soil. We
meet to-night in this splendid capital of France, yet with the radiant
folds of our country’s flag above us, that flag honored of the nations:

  “For grace and beauty and order draw
  Around that symbol of light and law.”

In thus assembling, we commune in the sacrament of a common memory with
our comrades across the seas, who on all their homestead hills are
celebrating the same glorious event. With them we exult in the proud
consciousness that by doing our duty as American soldiers in the days
of our youth, we not only gave renewed lustre to the martial annals
of our country, but through the triumph of our arms we added greatly
to the sum of human happiness, by widening the area of the world’s
civilization.

The occasion permits me to glance but briefly at the events of that war
which to some are still vivid memories, while others must either glean
them from the historic page or hear them recited by the men who then
acted history.

That war had its origin in the invasion of the soil of the United
States by the Army of Mexico.

On January 10th, 1845, the Congress of the United States passed an Act
providing for the annexation of Texas.

The Act was ratified by the Congress of that Republic on July 4th,
1845, and Texas with its two hundred and sixty five thousand square
miles of territory, an area greater than that of the German Empire or
of Austria, thus became an integral part of the American Union.

Texas had already maintained her independence for ten years against
Mexico, the parent country.

Those who have questioned the political morality of the act of
annexation may be fully answered by reference to the fact that England,
France and Spain had all formally recognized the independence of the
Republic of Texas three years before her admission into our Union.
Mexico resolved to nullify that act by force of arms.

In view of her aggressive attitude, Major General Zachary Taylor, U.
S. Army, was ordered to the Rio Grande, the Western boundary of Texas,
with a force of about four thousand men, chiefly regulars, where he
arrived July 20th, 1845, establishing his headquarters at Corpus
Christi, within four miles of the Mexican Army, then encamped ten
thousand strong, under the command of General Ampudia, on the South
side of that river. In January, 1846, General Taylor moved his command
to a point opposite Matamoras, Mexico, and erected an earthwork which
he termed Fort Brown.

On the 24th of April, 1846, Captain Thornton, U. S. Army, while
marching at the head of seventy men of the 2nd Dragoons in Texas, fell
into an ambuscade of Mexican regular troops, numbering between three
and four hundred, and after a gallant resistance, during which he had
sixteen of his command killed, and thirty-eight wounded, was obliged
to surrender. Six days later the Mexican forces attacked Fort Brown,
and were handsomely repulsed. On May 8th General Taylor with 2,300 men
met and defeated the Mexican Army 6,000 strong, under the command of
Generals Ampudia and Arista, at Palo Alto. On the following day, the
Mexican Army having received a reinforcement of 1,000 men, made a stand
at Resaca de la Palma (Ravine of Palms) and was there again defeated by
General Taylor, the Mexican loss being 975 and ours but 110 killed and
wounded.

It is a noteworthy fact that those battles were fought without a
declaration of war on either side. Indeed no declaration of war was
ever made by either of the two contending Republics.

On May 13th, 1846, the Congress of the United States passed a
resolution declaring that war existed between the United Stales and
Mexico, and further resolved, that the war should be prosecuted, until
we obtained “indemnity for the past, and security for the future.”

In response to the call of the President (Jas. K. Polk) for thirty
thousand volunteers, sixty-five thousand volunteered promptly. The
quotas furnished by the respective States were as follows:

Alabama 2,981, Maryland and district of Columbia 1,372, Arkansas
1,274, Florida 289, Missouri 6,441, Georgia 1,987, North Carolina 895,
Illinois 5,791, South Carolina 1,120, Indiana 4,329, Ohio 5,334, Iowa
229, New Jersey 420, Kentucky 4,094, New York 1,890, Louisiana 7,341,
Pennsylvania 2,117, Michigan 1,072, Tennessee 5,392, Massachusetts 930,
Texas 7,394, Mississippi 2,235, Wisconsin 146.

To these must be added about seven thousand regulars of the United
States Army, and one thousand marines, making an aggregate force of
about seventy-three thousand rank and file, constituting that gallant
army, charged with the duty in connection with our grand old historic
navy of enforcing from Mexico “indemnity for the past and security for
the future.”

That demand, history attests, they translated into action.

The Republic of Mexico consisted of twenty-four states, with a
population of about six millions. It had but twenty years previously
achieved its independence against the veteran army of Spain.

It had a standing army of fifty thousand, and had called into the field
an additional force, chiefly volunteers, of nearly two hundred thousand.

Her soldiers were well armed and equipped, the muskets of her infantry
all bearing the English Tower-stamp, and the cartridges being of the
best British manufacture. Her troops were, in the main, magnificently
uniformed, and we could say with literal truth that her “Cohorts were
gleaming with purple and gold.” Her coast defences were provided with
good armaments, her principal sea-port, Vera-Cruz, being guarded
by the Castle of San Juan d’Ulloa, built of white coral rock, and
mounting three hundred heavy guns. No country was better adapted by its
topography for defensive warfare.

Abounding with mountain ranges, and rocky hill-slopes, the true
citadels of freedom, that commanded all practicable roads to the
interior, while she had a formidable ally in the deadly climate of her
coast, where the tropical sun, shining upon the ever-decaying masses
of rank vegetation, breeds the fatal malaria which burns up the blood
with fever, alternating with the icy “norther” that within an hour will
often vary the temperature from summer’s heat to an almost Arctic cold.

Three lines of operation against Mexico were now determined on:

1. General Taylor was to operate from Matamoras, along the line of the
Rio-Grande.

2. A column under General Kearny was to conquer the Mexican territories
of New Mexico and California.

3. A column under General Wool was to enter the Northern States of
Mexico and conquer Chihuahua, and the adjacent country.

In pursuance of this plan General Taylor advanced upon the Mexican
Array, then in position at Monterey, on September 5th, 1846.

His army numbered 6,600 of all arms, composed of 3,200 regular troops
of the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, and 8th, infantry; 4 companies of
the 2nd Dragoons, and 5 batteries (30) guns of field artillery, and
3,400 volunteers, consisting of the first regiments from Kentucky,
Mississipi, Ohio and Tennessee, two Texas regiments commanded by Brig.
Gen. Henderson, including Jack Hay’s famous Texas Rangers, and one
battalion from Maryland and the District of Columbia.

The Mexican force consisted of 7,000 regulars and 3,500 volunteers,
with 84 pieces of artillery in strong works covering every approach
to the city. Their principal works were designated as Forts Diabolo,
Teneria, Soldado, Independence, the Bishop’s Palace and the Citadel.

Our army attacked in three divisions, commanded respectively by
Generals Worth, Twiggs and Butler of Kentucky.

The enemy made a desperate resistance. The firing was incessant from
the windows and flat roofs of the dwellings, and from barricades in the
streets when our troops had entered the city after carrying all the
outer defences by assault.

The attack began on September 20th, and ended on the morning of the
23rd, with the surrender of the enemy. Our loss was about 950 killed
and wounded.

Early in December, 1846, all of the regular infantry was withdrawn from
General Taylor’s army and ordered to report to Major-General Winfield
Scott, the Commander-in-Chief, who had assumed command in person of the
fourth great column of attack, whose objective point was the Capital
of Mexico, and which was entitled, “The Army of Mexico.” General
Taylor’s army was thus reduced to only 4,500 men consisting altogether
of volunteers, except three batteries of the regular army, and two
squadrons of the 2nd Dragoons. Its numerical weakness invited attack,
and General Santa Anna, the most renowned and skilful of the Mexican
Commanders, and President of the Republic of Mexico, who had won a
decisive victory over the French Army of invasion nine years before,
moved his army against it. That army, according to the Mexican official
reports, numbered twenty three thousand, two-thirds regular soldiers.

General Taylor decided to accept battle, and selected a position
admirably adapted for defence at the Rancho Buena Vista. The position
was marked by narrow defiles, and rugged and high ridges, that
commanded the valley below. The battle began at daylight on February
23rd, 1846, by the attack of the enemy in force on our left flank.
It was gallantly repulsed by the fire of the second and 3rd Indiana
Riflemen, and a company of Col. Yell’s dismounted Arkansas Cavalry,
with Bragg’s and Shermann’s splendidly served batteries, diverged to
our left, where the enemy was concentrating for a decisive attack. The
extreme left of our line was posted on a high and broad plateau and was
composed of the 2nd Indiana, and 2nd Illinois regiments of infantry.

The tremendous impact of that attack forced those regiments to retire
in considerable disorder after they had sustained for some time a
severe cross-fire of artillery, and a heavy fire on their front, by a
greatly superior force of infantry. At that crisis of the battle the
1st Mississipi Rifles, the only regiment of that army that was armed
with rifles having percussion locks, commanded by Colonel Jefferson
Davis, promptly interposed between the retreating regiments, and the
charging Mexican cavalry, and doubtless saved the day by their rapid
and effective firing, before which the enemy recoiled. There are
veterans of Buena Vista, who, though in after years they still remained
true to the flag of their country, and struck in its just defence on
fields “shot-sown and bladed thick with steel,” do not feel that they
sully their loyalty in respectfully saluting Jefferson Davis, _as he
was_, recalling him to memory as with tall heroic form he so gallantly
upheld the starry ensign of the Union upon the steady and blazing line
that sheltered the brave but broken columns of Illinois and Indiana,
from the uplifted sabres of a merciless foe.

The art of dying at the right time is the art preservative of great
reputations.

The Mississipi Rifles were soon bravely supported by the 1st Illinois,
2nd Indiana, and 2nd Kentucky regiments with section (2 pieces) of
Bragg’s famous battery, and the ground lost on our left flank was
in great part recovered. At the base of the ridge the left flank of
the enemy was held in check by Indiana and Arkansas infantry, and the
destructive fire of our artillery.

At that moment, when his army had met with a disastrous and
demoralizing repulse, General Santa Anna sent forward a flag of truce
and our fire was suspended. The bearer of the flag, to the amazement of
General Taylor, presented a demand for the surrender of his army.

This expedient cannot be too strongly commended in the art of war,
although writers upon grand strategy have strangely overlooked it. It
is not suggested even by General Jomini, in his exhaustive work “Traité
des grandes Opérations Militaires.”

It may, however, be thus formulated: When your attacking columns are
shattered and repulsed, hurry up a flag of truce, and check the advance
of your exultant enemy, and demand his surrender, and then, before he
can recover from his astonishment at your sublime impudence reform your
shattered lines and advance to further vantage ground, or retire in
good order, under the shelter of the peaceful symbol.

Santa Anna’s messenger returned with General Taylor’s laconic answer,
“I decline acceding to your demand,” and the Mexicans again advanced
to the attack, bringing into action all their reserves, and were again
repulsed with heavy loss, after a terrible struggle.

The battle of twelve sanguinary hours on that mountain plateau had
ended, and “our flag was still there.”

General Santa Anna retired rapidly with his army, only pausing in the
vicinity long enough to send off a bulletin to the Capital announcing
that he had “won a decisive victory over the barbarians of the North.”
Thus ended in a blaze of glory the battle-record of the “army of
occupation,” under General Taylor.

In the meantime, the Army of the West, under the command of General
Stephen W. Kearney, had been reaping a rich harvest of laurels.

By a rapid march from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to Santa Fé, a distance
of 750 miles in thirty days, he secured possession of New Mexico.

Dividing his force (2,500) at Santa Fé, General Kearney with 1,500
Dragoons marched to California, and defeated the enemy in a warm
engagement at San Pasqual. He then formed a junction with the
California rifle battalion, and a force of 750 sailors and marines
from the naval squadron, under the command of Commodore Stockton, who
had just succeeded the gallant Commodore Sloat, who had previously
taken the California port of Monterey. Prior to the arrival of General
Kearney, however, that brilliant soldier, and untiring and sagacious
explorer, John C. Fremont, had hoisted the American standard in
California. He was there under orders to ascertain and lay out a new
route to Oregon further South than that travelled by our emigrants.

The Mexican Governor of California having in May, 1846, ordered
all American settlers to leave that province, and having raised a
force to expel them, Colonel Fremont recruited a body of 400 men and
defeated the Mexicans in several sharp engagements in the valley of
the Sacramento, before he had even heard that war existed between the
United States and Mexico. Under his able and enterprising leadership
the Americans in California, united with many of the natives, declared
the independence of the province of California on the 4th of July, 1845.

It has since transpired that but for this timely action on the part of
Col. Fremont and the resolute Americans associated with him, a large
force would have been landed from the British fleet in that vicinity,
and California would have been taken possession of by England, under an
arrangement with its Mexican Governor.

It had been taken possession of by Admiral Drake for England in the
year 1579, under the name of “New Albion,” and the vague British claim
was to be revived in the interest of English capitalists who held the
bonds of Mexico to the amount of one hundred and fifty millions of
dollars.

A few months after these stirring and important events on the Pacific
slope, Col. A. W. Doniphan began his famous march from Santa Fé to
Saltillo.

He started on November 13th, 1846, with a force consisting of nine
hundred Missouri cavalry and two batteries of Missouri artillery.
A part of his command 500 strong was attacked on Christmas Day at
Brazito by a force of 1,000 Mexicans, which they defeated in twenty
minutes. They again defeated the enemy on February 28th, 1847, at
Sacramento, near the city of Chihuahua, and entered that important
city triumphantly. On the next day Doniphan began his march through
the Northern States of Mexico, back to Saltillo. He accomplished this
renowned march, winning victories as he went, in forty days, a distance
of 1,500 miles. This dims the lustre of the retreat of the ten thousand
Greeks from the field of Cunaxa, as graphically described by Xenophon,
their commander and historian.

While these events were in progress, Col. Sterling Price, of Missouri,
who had been left by Doniphan at Santa Fé, with a force of about 500
men, had been, as he always was, active and successful.

On January 19th, 1847, Governor Charles Bent, with thirty-five other
Americans were massacred at Taos, New Mexico, in cold blood by a
Mexican force of about two thousand cavalry, which soon after appeared
in the vicinity of Santa Fé. Price attacked and defeated them, after
a desperate conflict, at Canada, about 18 miles north of Santa Fé. He
pursued them on their retreat, and two days later inflicted severe loss
upon them at Embedo, and finally on February 4th he utterly routed them
at Taos, the scene of their recent savage atrocity.

The scene now opens on a broader field of action.

On the 9th of March, 1847, the Army of Mexico, under the command of
Major-General Winfield Scott, that most regal of American soldiers,
never to be named by us, comrades, but with uplifted hat, began its
victorious march for the “Halls of the Montezumas.” General Scott on
that day effected the landing of his army at Sacrificios, an island
seven miles west of Vera Cruz. The landing was made in seventy-five
surf boats, each carrying seventy-five men, under cover of our fleet,
commanded by Commodore Conner, with those able and dashing officers
Commodores Perry and Tatnall commanding squadrons of the fleet. The
army there numbered 13,200 rank and file. General Scott established his
lines on the north and east fronts of Vera Cruz on the same day. Within
ten days he had planted five large siege batteries built of sand bags
about 1,000 yards from the walls of the city. One of them was mounted
with 8-inch ship guns, and manned by sailors from the fleet.

A demand for the surrender of the city having been made and refused,
our guns opened fire on March 22nd, and for three days and nights
rained upon it the red ruin of avenging war. On the morning of the
25th, General Laudero, commanding the garrison of the city and the
Castle of San Juan d’Ulloa, sent in a flag of truce with overtures of
surrender. He at first proposed to surrender the city alone. General
Scott refused this, as the castle distant but a mile to the South East
of the city, completely commanded it, and he therefore demanded its
surrender also.

This demand was finally acceded to and the surrender of the Castle of
San Juan d’Ulloa, and the City of Vera Cruz, with their garrisons 8,000
strong was formally made on March 29, 1847. Our loss was but sixteen
killed and wounded.

On April 8th our army took up its line of march along the national
road for the Capital of Mexico distant 290 miles. On April 14th it
confronted the Army of Santa Anna, 20,000 strong posted on the heights
of Cerro Gordo. The mountain ridges on which he had taken position, had
been well fortified by that indomitable but cruel and faithless Mexican
general, and fully commanded our route to the Capital. At the instance,
and under the direction of that most excellent soldier Captain Robert
E. Lee, of the Corps of Engineers, a road was cut through the dense
forest on the enemy’s left, so as to enable us to take his position in
reverse. This work occupied three days during which our working parties
were frequently attacked.

On the morning of the 18th of April, at dawn, we attacked in force.

The command of our column of attack on the enemy’s left was the post of
honor, for it was the strongest point of his position, as it covered
his only line of retreat. That command was assigned to Brigadier
General James Shields, one of that warlike Irish race who have ever
keenly felt the rapture of the fight wherever battle was to be done for
a noble cause--a most knightly and heroic soldier, who would have worn
with stainless honor the white plume of Henry of Navarre on the field
of Ivry, and have worthily led the immortal Irish Brigade along the
path of glory that it trod at Fontenoy.

Our troops dashed up the mountain side with unquailing intrepidity, the
First Regiment of New York, volunteers of Shield’s brigade under the
command of that most gallant soldier Colonel Ward B. Burnett, bravely
leading on our extreme right. The rocky ridge was soon ablaze with the
fire of musketry and artillery.

In three hours the Mexican Army was routed. The battle was done, and
far up on the crest of the mountain range where the eagle dwells alone,
the white stars of our country’s banner shone serenely on their blue
field. Our loss was 97 killed and 408 wounded, and that of the enemy
about 1,400 in killed and wounded, and 2,750 prisoners, among whom were
officers and men of the recently surrendered garrison of Vera Cruz, who
were serving against us in violation of their paroles.

Harney’s Dragoons pursued the enemy hotly, and sabred their scattered
columns for fifteen miles along the road to Jalapa.

At that city the army of Scott was reduced to about 6,500 by the muster
out of the greater part of his volunteer forces, as they had enlisted
for only one year; and their term of service had expired. Leaving
Jalapa on the 22nd of April we entered Peroté and its strong castle,
a full bastion work of 80 guns, on the evening of the 23rd, the enemy
having evacuated it on approach. Halting here to rest for about two
weeks we marched for Puebla, 70 miles distant, the chief manufacturing
city in Mexico with a population of 65,000.

We occupied Puebla on May 15th, after a desultory fire from the enemy
in its streets.

Here General Scott was obliged to await, for nearly three months, the
arrival of reinforcements. Every day’s delay increased our hazard, as
the enemy was fortifying, along all the approaches to the capital.

The time was not wholly lost, however, for General Scott there
brought the drill of his volunteer regiments to the highest state of
perfection, so that they marched and manœuvred with all the precision
of trained regulars.

At length the long-expected reinforcements arrived, and on the morning
of August 7th, 1847, our Army moved out of Puebla on its march for the
city of Mexico, all our bands playing the Star Spangled Banner.

It numbered then about 10,000 men, consisting of four divisions.

The cavalry was commanded by that redoubtable soldier, the Murat of the
Army, Brt. Brig. Genl. Wm. S. Harney, and consisted of detachments of
the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Dragoons, to the number of about seven hundred
and fifty.

After a toilsome march of about seventy miles, across mountain spurs
and along a very rugged road, the army, on the afternoon of August
17th, 1847, looked down for the first time on the valley of Mexico,
and saw from afar its magnificent capital, with the golden crosses of
its churches glittering in the red light of the setting sun. There
lay before us the same broad lake, mirroring the same snow-crowned
mountains in its glassy bosom, on which Cortez with his steel-clad
warriors had gazed, in the same month, three hundred and twenty six
years before. On reaching a point about nine miles from the city,
General Scott ascertained by a _reconnaissance_ that the Mexicans had
fortified El Peñón, a mountain that commanded the approach to the
capital by the National road. He therefore ordered a counter march with
the view to turn the lake (Chalco) on the south. This required a march
of twenty five miles, which was rapidly made, and on the 18th, the army
was concentrated at a point about ten miles from the city at Contreras,
a strong position held by General Valencia, with field-works mounting
twenty-four guns. These, General Scott determined to take in reverse,
and we therefore made a night march of eight miles over the pedregal
or lava fields, a route deemed by the Mexicans impracticable for any
army. The assault was made on the rear and flanks of the surprised
enemy soon after daylight on August 20th, by Riley’s Cadivalders and
Shield’s Brigades, all under the command of General P. F. Smith, whom
General Shields, although ranking above him, magnanimously allowed to
retain the command that he might carry out dispositions made prior to
the arrival of Shields on the ground.

The whole line of works was stormed, and the battle won in eighteen
minutes.

The enemy broke at the first assault, and fled in the direction of the
city, and nearly five hundred of them were captured by the New York
Volunteers and the Palmetto regiment, that were posted to cut off their
retreat. At this battle two guns of the 4th Artillery, that were lost
without dishonor at Buena Vista, were recaptured from the enemy.

The army, after resting a few hours at St. Augustine, a town about
four miles from Contreras, marched against the main body of the enemy,
distant six miles from the former point.

We were soon in the presence of the Mexican Army, thirty thousand
strong, commanded by Santa Anna, and composed of the best troops of
Mexico, including several thousand volunteers. It occupied a vast
intrenched camp near the village and convent of Churubusco, about seven
miles from the capital.

While marching to this field we heard a number of heavy explosions
which we soon learned were due to the blowing up of the bridges along
all our possible lines of retreat back to the coast.

That meant, as every soldier well knew, a declaration by our Mexican
foe of “War to the knife, and the knife to the hilt.”

General Scott halted the army on a lofty plateau overlooking the valley
where stretched the serried lines of the enemy and where

  “The sheen of the spears was like stars on the sea,
  When the blue waves roll nightly on deep Galilee.”

He there briefly addressed the several commands, and expressed his firm
conviction, that each man would do his duty as an American soldier, and
thus assure victory to our arms.

That word “Duty,” a code of honor in itself, unknown in its full
import, to every language but our own, has ever inspired the loftiest
achievements of the English speaking race.

The battle opened at noon, by the attack of the Division of General
Worth (the Marshal Ney of the Army) on the enemy’s left flank, and soon
became general.

The degree of resistance that we encountered, is indicated by the
following extract from the report of Brig. Genl. Shields as to the
operations of his own brigade and it is doubtless applicable to every
command on that field: “My brigade composed of the 1st New York
regiment of Volunteers, and the Palmetto (S. C.) regiment, advanced
steadily against the right flank of the enemy under as terrible a fire
as any that soldiers ever faced.”

At sundown the battle ended with the defeat of the Mexican army which
retreated in great disorder toward the city.

The Dragoons, under Harney, followed the flying enemy fast and far,
and Major Phil. Kearney, not hearing the recall sounded, or rather not
heeding it, pursued them to the walls of the city, sabreing the gunners
at its very gate, where he lost his right arm, and returned wounded
behind one of his soldiers. Our loss was 1,045 killed and wounded,
while that of the enemy was estimated at 7,000 in killed, wounded, and
prisoners.

We captured 5,000 prisoners and 86 pieces of artillery.

Among the many deeds of heroism done at Churubusco, I must note one
of the most daring that has passed into history. In our charge upon
the field-work known as the tête de pont, we found our way blocked
by a burning Mexican ammunition wagon, that threatened a destructive
explosion. At this juncture Sergeant Alexander M. Keneday of the 3rd
Dragoons, attached to Worth’s escort, sprang into the wagon, and
calling three of his comrades to his aid, with the sparks flying around
him threw the packages of gunpowder into the river below, thus saving
many lives and enabling our charging columns to advance. Sergeant
Keneday is now the honored Secretary of our National Association.

On the same evening a flag of truce arrived from Santa Anna who
proposed an armistice of twenty days, stating that he desired to
negociate terms of peace. General Scott assented, and having but three
days’ rations in his commissariat, imposed as one of the conditions,
that he should be allowed to send a train with a proper escort into the
city, and there purchase supplies for his army. This was accordingly
done. On Sept. 6th, Gen. Scott declared the armistice at an end, having
discovered that the wily Santa Anna, in violation of its solemn terms,
was engaged in fortifying his position and reinforcing his army.

At dawn on Sept. 8th we again advanced. Santa Anna with his army
occupied Molino del Rey or the King’s Mill, a series of massive stone
buildings surrounded by high walls, about one mile and a half west of
the castle of Chapultepec and three miles from the city of Mexico. His
force consisted of ten thousand men and twenty four pieces of artillery.

Our attacking columns numbered 3,600 with Drum’s, Huger’s, and Duncan’s
batteries, and a company of Voltigeurs, under the immediate command of
General Worth, all regulars.

We attacked in three columns, and our first attack being repulsed, the
Mexicans sallied from their works, and lanced our wounded officers and
men, and cut their throats within full view of our army.

Worth rapidly reinforcing with Cadwallader’s Brigade, and Stewart’s
rifles, that had been left to support Huger’s Battery, and Duncan’s
heavy Battery of 24-pounders, attacked the enemy’s right and centre,
and having taken the Casa Mata, a strong stone citadel, the enemy
abandoned all his other positions, and the day was won. In proportion
to the force engaged, this was, for us, the most bloody battle of the
war. We had 953 killed and wounded, among them seventy five officers.
The loss of the enemy was 1200 killed and wounded, and 850 prisoners.

The desperate nature of the conflict may be indicated by the fact that
towards its close, the guns of Drum’s and Huger’s batteries were served
almost entirely by officers--graduates of West Point, nearly every
enlisted artillery man having fallen at his post.

The victory was important as Molino del Rey was the chief cannon
foundry of Mexico and its guns commanded some of the approaches to the
Castle of Chapultepec.

That castle was a strong fortress of rock and masonry, mounting 26
guns, and garrisoned by 2,500 regular troops and 300 cadets under the
command of General Bravo. It was the National Military Academy of
Mexico. It was situated about one mile and a half from the capital, on
the crest of a steep rocky height, which rose 189 feet above the road
which entered the city at the Belén gate. About midway up the ascent
was a strong redoubt on the south front, and just below that, a heavy
stone wall, with a banquette, which ran along nearly the entire front,
and was well manned with Mexican regulars. Our batteries opened fire
on the castle at the distance of about 700 yards, on the morning of
September 12th, and at night fall had made several breaches in its
walls.

Soon after midnight our forces silently occupied the ditch that nearly
encircled the foot of the hill, and which was bordered with a profuse
growth of the Maguay plant or American aloe, which served to screen us
from the view of the enemy. At day-dawn on the 13th our men stepped
from the ditch, and being quickly aligned under the fire of the enemy,
advanced to the assault. The entire army was brought into action,
except three regiments of Worth’s division held in reserve at Molino
del Rey. In a whirlwind of fire from cannon and musketry, that swept
down the hill, which was everywhere ablaze with the flashing guns,
our men pressed upward, and onward, our artillery, in the road below,
firing shot and shell over their heads as they advanced.

Another desperate rush, and their bayonets sparkled at every breach,
and soon the flag of the First New York volunteers, the first to crown
the castle, floated out above the battlements with its inspiring motto
“Excelsior,” and proclaimed that Chapultepec was ours!

The presence here to-night of one of the gallant survivors of that
heroic regiment, Colonel Daniel E. Hungerford who is on my left, and
Colonel Charles J. Murphy who is on my right, a soldier of another
regiment, leads me to recall two incidents of that battle, one of which
moves me deeply with a sense of personal gratitude and bereavement.

The Colonel of that Regiment, Ward B. Burnett, who proved himself
worthy to lead it, was severely wounded at Cherutusco, and the command
devolved upon its Lieutenant-Colonel Baxter, who was killed while most
gallantly leading it at Chapultepec. Its brave Major Burnham then
assumed command, but was soon temporarily disabled by a glancing shot
or a flying fragment of rock.

At that critical moment, when the Regiment was nearing the breaches
under a galling fire, Captain Daniel E. Hungerford, then but in his
twenty-fifth year, though not entitled to command it, sprang to the
front and cheered the regiment forward with his voice and waving sword.

As to the incident which touches me personally. I recall the forlorn
hope of my regiment composed of thirty men under the command of
Lieutenant Ralph Bell, third Lieutenant of my company and the youngest
officer of the _Palmetto Regiment_, being only in his twenty-first
year. Those who knew him well remember his tall, lithe but soldierly
figure, his light hair and gentle blue eyes, and his face almost
feminine in its delicate beauty.

Most vividly does he come back to my memory, as he sprang forward
leading that forlorn hope, as cheerily as if he were going to meet
his bride, and with the blood trickling from a wound upon his right
cheek, pointing upward to the castle with the hilt of his sword, its
blade having been shivered by a grape shot. But only two years later,
he passed away among strangers in (California) far distant from his
home, and his eyes closed in a strange land in death by the brotherly
ministrations of his old comrade-in-arms Colonel Charles J. Murphy,
who was himself a gallant actor on that field, though but a youth of
seventeen years. Well indeed has the poet written,

  “The bravest are the tenderest.
  The loving are the daring.”

But to continue my cursory narrative of events that would require a
volume to detail them fully.

Worth’s division pressed the enemy closely on his line of retreat to
the eastern or San Cosmo gate of the city. General Scott decided to
make his main attack at that gate, deeming it the most vulnerable
point. With that view he ordered General Quitman with his division, to
make a feint, and occupy the attention of the enemy at the Garita de
Belén on the west.

Quitman’s command moved rapidly along the causeway leading to the city
near the margin of the lake, carrying several batteries of the enemy,
he having determined to convert the intended feint into a real attack
and win a victory in violation of orders.

Far to the front the New York volunteers, the _Palmetto Regiment_, and
Captain James Stewart’s company of regular rifles sprang from arch to
arch of the great stone aqueduct, firing with rapidity as they advanced.

Drum’s battery galloped rapidly to the front, and opened an effective
fire, which was at once replied to by the enemy, with at least twenty
heavy guns. In a few minutes nearly every officer and man of the
battery was killed or wounded. Its chivalric commander lay in the road
with both thighs shattered by a cannon ball, but true to the line
of his duty, living and dying, he called out to the Infantry in the
arches, “For God’s sake save my guns!” They quickly responded, and met
the advancing foe with the bayonet, driving them back, and following
them into their works, and the last sounds that reached the ears of the
noble captain Simon Drum, were the victorious shouts of his comrades at
the gate.

The magnificent Infantry of P. F. Smith’s and Pierce’s Brigades, were
also at this time delivering a destructive fire at the enemy on our
flanks.

The Mexican troops were soon driven from all their positions near
the gate, and at twenty minutes past one o’clock on the afternoon of
September 13th, 1847, the _Palmetto flag of South Carolina_ was planted
on the wall of the City of Mexico,--the first foreign ensign that had
waved over that spot since Fernando Cortez had there unfurled the royal
standard of Spain on August 13th, 1521.

Our further advance that day was checked by the fire of the citadel, a
work with ten guns, about 600 yards from the Belén gate.

About six in the afternoon its commander, General Flores, offered to
surrender, on the novel condition that General Quitman should give him
a receipt for all his ordnance, quartermaster and commissary stores.

He was informed that receipts on such occasions were written with the
sword, but his demand was acceded to, and the citadel surrendered the
next morning, September 14th, at sunrise.

The main body of the army under General Worth drove the enemy from
every position at the San Cosmo gate, and on the night of the 13th
bivouacked within the walls of the city.

At noon on September 14th the entire army was united in the Plaza
Mayor, or great square of the city of Mexico, the site of the ancient
Tenochtitlan of the Aztec empire, nearly eight thousand feet above the
level of the sea.

The stars and stripes were soon unfurled above the Palace of the
Cortes, (Congress), and six thousand five hundred American soldiers
stood triumphant in the capital of Mexico, with its hostile population
numbering one hundred and fifty thousand souls.

The subsequent operations of our army, though brilliant, were but of
a minor character. Early in October, Santa Anna laid siege to our
garrison at Puebla which consisted of the First Pennsylvania regiment
of volunteers, under Colonel Childs. He summoned the garrison to
surrender, stating, with his usual mendacity, that he had routed the
army of General Scott. Col. Childs occupying Fort Loretto, in the
western suburb of Puebla, repelled four desperate assaults of the
enemy, 5000 strong, and Santa Anna drew off his forces on the approach
of General Joseph Lane who was advancing from the coast, with needed
reinforcements for Scott’s army. The last engagement of the war was
fought by Brig. General Sterling Price at Rosales, New Mexico, on March
15th, 1848. He there, with but 300 Missouri Volunteers, defeated a
Mexican force of 1000, capturing their commanding General, and eleven
pieces of artillery.

The war ended by a treaty of peace, concluded at the Hacienda of
Guadeloupe Hidalgo on February 2nd, 1848. Peace was formally announced
in a proclamation by the President of the United States, on July 4th,
1848.

In this necessarily imperfect sketch of the salient events of the
Mexican war, I have had to omit even the name of many an unforgotten
hero.

It was no holiday war. It was replete with toilsome marches, with
blistered and bleeding feet, through hot sands, under a tropical sun,
and over jagged rocks, and snowy mountain ranges where horses and
riders perished with cold. It abounded with nameless tragedies, both
on bloody fields near many a battery’s smoking guns, and in the deep
gloom of fever stricken hospitals. In that memorable war of two years,
we fought seventy battles and engagements without the final loss of a
single gun or American ensign.

Engaged always against heavy odds, we bore the honor of our great
republic triumphantly, on our ever advancing swords and bayonets.

Blended with this patriotic reflection, we proudly recall the fact that
we marched nearly three thousand miles through the country of an enemy,
alien to us in race and language, and performed no act to wound the
modesty of woman, or to sully the sanctity of her person.

The flames of no defenceless homestead lighted up our line of march,
and no matin hymn or vesper bell was silenced by our coming. We were
always merciful in the hour of victory, and our army, while vindicating
the prowess of our country, also illustrated its civilisation. What
have been the material results of that victorious war? It acquired for
us the vast territories of California, Nevada, Colorado, New Mexico,
Idaho, Arizona, and Utah, thus adding one million square miles or
640,000,000 of acres to the United States, nearly doubling its area.

According to authoritative statistics, there have been taken from the
mines and rivers of the region thus acquired since 1848, gold and
silver of the value of three thousand millions of dollars. Averaging
the soldier at 140 pounds, this amount is sufficient to award to every
soldier engaged in the battles of Mexico, were even all now living, his
weight in pure gold.

But the enterprising men, who developed that imperial domain that
had so long lain stagnant under a semi-barbaric rule, were more than
mere delvers in mines, and gold-washers in river-sands. They were the
builders of empire, the raw material, the muscle and the mind of great
civilised States, whose industrial products have even exceeded in value
during the past thirty five years, all the precious metals that have
been taken from their rocks and streams.

Time, with its wide arch of forty years, has spanned many memorable
events in our country, since we bore its flag in triumph over the
smoking guns of hostile batteries on fields afar.

Within thirteen years after we had entered victoriously the capital
of Mexico, the capital of the United States was itself menaced by a
hostile army.

Through four years of internecine war the republic, founded by
Washington, battled for its existence against armed legions that
challenged its rightful supremacy within the State where Washington was
born.

That war embraced within its theatre of operations more than 2,700,000
men, and was signalized by more than one thousand battles and
engagements. Soon after its termination, every American State, through
its duly elected representatives, answered to the roll call beneath the
dome of the Nation’s Capitol.

The magnanimous victors in that mighty war deserved victory, and they
neither abridged the rights, nor wounded the self-respect of the
vanquished.

Hence, to-day, all American citizens dwell together in loyal unity
beneath the benign rule of our indestructible Union. And I can attest,
as a Southerner, through five generations “native and to the manor
born,” that if my comrades in arms of the Confederate army ever dream
of future wars, it is with the sincere hope, that they may aid in
bearing the flag of the Union among a people who have never looked upon
its starry folds, and into lands that have never felt the power of its
eagle’s beak.


TOASTS.

“The day we celebrate.” Responded to by Judge McKay of South Carolina.

“The President of the United States.”

This toast was received with great applause and drank standing.

Colonel Murphy in reply to the toast said:

=Mr. Chairman and comrades of the Mexican war, and Gentlemen.=--I
feel highly honoured, at being called on to respond to this patriotic
toast, in the presence of this important and representative assemblage,
gathered here to-night, to unite in common with our countrymen at home,
in celebrating this anniversary.

It is significant of the ardent patriotism of our people, that however
varied may be the character of our meetings, this toast to the
President of the United States is always drunk with enthusiasm and
unanimity. And you will, I am sure, agree with me, that the able and
high-minded gentleman, who now presides over the destinies of the
Republic, is a worthy successor to those who have gone before him in
his exalted office. It is a matter of patriotic pride to us all that
the pages of history have never yet been sullied by the misdeeds of
an American President, and the representatives for the highest office
in the gift of a free people have always been honored at home and
respected and admired abroad.

We can justly claim that our Presidents form an unbroken line of wise
and capable rulers, that leave indelible marks for good on the progress
of civilization in the path of liberty, justice, and freedom. As for
the present occupant of the White House, none can gainsay his devotion
to duty, his ability and character, and his conscientious endeavour to
serve faithfully the interest of our common country at home and abroad.
Whoever our chief magistrate may be, we may be as Americans, sure that
the national honor is always secure, and that our flag, the glorious
“Stars and Stripes” will always be among the foremost standards among
the nations of the earth. It can be truly said that our President is
at the head of a happy family. Differences may divide us on election
day, but at all times, love and reverence for our institutions, and
liberties animate us, the fires of patriotism, obliterating the petty
distinctions of politics, burn as brightly to-night in the North,
South, East and West, of a united and prosperous country, as well as
in the breasts of those around this board this evening. The public
utterances of the President mark him as a statesman, who appreciates to
the full the grandeur of our country, and the greatness of our people.
In visiting through the several states last summer, the brave men of
the South vied with the men of the North, in giving him an enthusiastic
welcome, and proving to the world that, when the occasion calls for it,
the spirit of loyalty and patriotism, and naught else, will be found in
every American heart.

It is a pleasing spectacle to us, and a source of surprise and
admiration to foreigners, that our President comes and goes, as an
ordinary citizen; respect for his office and person being as general
among our 75 million inhabitants that we need not even the slightest
display of force to with-hold his authority or strengthen his public
acts. This is indeed an impressive fact, perhaps unparalleled in
the history of any country, and a tribute to the stability of our
institutions, supported by the people’s will and dominated by a spirit
of justice and intellectual power. We have weathered a terrible storm,
but the timbers of the ship of State have stood the strain. Our past
has been glorious, and if we are true to our trust, we may look forward
with optimism and faith to the future of our country, now the light of
the world, and a beacon of hope to the oppressed of every land.

This elbow touch of cordiality and enjoyment with fellow-Americans on
foreign soil is a most happy occasion for us all, but the grandest
sight in this hall is our American flag, that symbol of beauty and
glory, the red, white and blue, which recalls to our minds so much that
is dear to our hearts, home, friends and native land.

I know I express as the feelings of all when I say we are better
Americans for having travelled abroad. American citizenship is a title
the proudest might envy, and it confers a distinction of inestimable
value on its possessor. Let us assimilate all we can of the art and
learning of the world, we freely draw from the treasures of her
historic past, but let us always cherish and strengthen those grand
principles of liberty, which the Fathers of the Republic fought for,
and for the successful working of which we pledge ourselves.

May we all take part in many more festivities, and may our children’s
children gather in like similar joyous meeting, to celebrate the
anniversary of this day, for the blessings God may vouchsafe to our
beloved country, glorious and united, under as wise and capable a
President, as now resides in the White House at the National Capital.

“The President of our great sister Republic, France,” for whom three
rousing cheers were given, and the song of the _Marseillaise_ sung in
French with great spirit, by Colonel Murphy.

“In memory of our dead comrades.”

  COL. C. J. MURPHY,
  OF BRUSSELS.

  THE PRESS,

Responded to in a happy manner by Mr. Marshal of the N. Y. Paris
Herald, followed by reminiscences of the Mexican War.

I will now call on our comrade, Colonel Daniel E. Hungerford, who
commanded the 36th Regiment New York Volunteers, and served with great
distinction all through the war of the Rebellion. He was the youngest
captain in his regiment, the 2nd New York Volunteers, in the Mexican
War, and was the officer who first hoisted the American flag over the
Castle of Chapultepec. Time will not permit me to mention the many
heroic deeds of valour performed by Colonel Hungerford in the Mexican,
as well as in the Civil War. Colonel Hungerford, of Rome, Italy, will
now address you, which he did in the following words:--

 =Comrades and gentlemen.=--To-day, from the Atlantic to the Pacific,
 where a few of our comrades may be found they are gathered like
 ourselves, enjoying the brief moments in the recollections of our
 campaign of 1847 and 1848 in Mexico, a campaign fraught with so much
 importance to the progressive age of the nineteenth century. Neither
 the war of the Rebellion, (let its sad memories be for ever buried
 in the depths of oblivion, is my wish), nor any other war of ancient
 or modern times has accomplished so much to promote the present and
 future prosperity of the civilized world, as did the brief conflict
 between the Republics of Mexico and the United States of the North
 in 1846 and 1848. There is no part of the globe where civilization
 prevails, or where Christianity is taught and respected, but has
 experienced the beneficial effects, moral, physical, and financial,
 resulting from the magnificent and surprising campaigns of that
 eventful period, in which our countrymen will ever feel a pardonable
 pride. The impetus given to the gigantic spirit of enterprise, by
 the acquisition of nearly a million square miles of territory, and
 the almost simultaneous discovery of vast fields of gold and silver,
 completely revolutionized all the channels of human industry, and
 quickened into life the dormant energies and the inventive genius of
 the world. With colossal strides, our beloved country overtook the
 governments of the old world in the race for excellence, and to-day
 she proudly holds her place in the front rank, the youngest and the
 strongest, and the most hopeful of reaching the goal, and distancing
 the field, because of her illimitable resources as yet untouched.

 I am a old New Yorker, as you know, having no feeling of animosity
 with citizens of any other part, portion, or section of our common
 country. When the _Palmetto Regiment of South Carolina_ marched
 side by side with the New Yorkers, in front of the enemy in Mexico,
 there was a rivalry, to be sure, but it was a proper spirit of
 emulation--_ésprit de corps_ each trying to out-do the other, but both
 having the general interests of their common country at heart. There
 was no _North_ or no _South_, in the offensive sense, that entered
 into the general spirit of “go-ahead!” That contest on a foreign soil
 showed what the American people are capable of doing, when united
 under the old flag of their fathers--whether they hailed from the
 North or the South, East or West.

 In the war of the Rebellion I commanded a New York regiment on the
 side of the Union, but I never for a moment forgot that I was a
 soldier, or that the foe with whom we were contending was entitled to
 my respect as fellow-countrymen.

Colonel Murphy was asked to give his recollections of the war.

[Illustration: COLONEL CHAS. J. MURPHY]

The Chairman, on introducing the Colonel said it would not be out of
place here to give a brief sketch of his career. He is the youngest man
now living who served in the Mexican War. In the War of the Rebellion
he was one of the only two commissioned officers who were awarded the
Congressional Medal of Honor in the first general battle of the war,
Bull Run, where 50,000 men were engaged on each side. The other officer
was Major-General Adalbert Ames, of the 5th U. S. Artillery, now living
at Lowell, Mass. He was one of the only two regimental staff officers
of the same rank who won this distinction during the war. The other
officer was first Lieutenant John W. Clark, R.Q.M., 6th Regiment
Vermont Infantry.

Our medal of Honor ranks with that of the cross of the Legion of Honor
of France, and the Victoria Cross of England, and only 1,400 were
awarded a distinction greater than can be conferred by any potentate
in Europe, because granted to so few of the two million seven hundred
and fifty thousand men who were mustered into the armies of the United
States between 1861-65.

Colonel Murphy, after resigning from his regiment, and while awaiting
his commission in the regular army, which appointment was tendered him
by President Lincoln, was engaged in the battle of Fair Oaks, and all
through the seven days’ battles on the peninsula, from Gaine’s Mill to
that of Malvern Hill, as a volunteer aid, and this without rank or pay.

He erected the first field hospital for the army of the Potomac at
Harrison’s Landing.

Colonel Murphy was one of the first three officers who escaped from
Richmond after Bull Run. The history of this remarkable escape was
very graphically described by John S. C. Abbot, the historian, in
“Harper’s Magazine” of January, 1867. Colonel Murphy was one of the
old forty-niners of California, having arrived in San Francisco on the
ship South Carolina in June, 1849, the first sailing ship to arrive
with passengers for the mines from New York, after a short passage--for
those days--of 156 days.

Of the 300 passengers on board, the only lady was Mrs. John White, the
mother of the late U.S. Senator White now living in San Francisco, who
wrote two years ago that she was not aware of any living survivors of
those passengers except herself and Colonel Murphy, who were the two
youngest people on the ship.

He went from California to Shanghai, China, and established the first
commercial house at the mouth of the Yang Kin Pang River, opposite the
foreign quarter at Shanghai, and loaded the first vessel that carried
Chinese agricultural products to San Francisco.

Colonel Murphy has done more than any other man in the way of
introducing the products of California in Europe, and secured the first
gold medal for the grand wines of that State at the Antwerp Exposition.

He has done yeoman service in making known the splendid fruit of the
golden State, and it was mainly through his efforts while in the
service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture that the California wines
and fruit are now on sale in nearly all the grocery and wine houses of
Northern Europe.

It was through his initiative work that the exports of our Indian corn
was so largely increased from 24,000,000 bushels the year he commenced
the propaganda to over 213,000,000 last year.

If he had devoted the last fifteen of the best years of his life with
the same enthusiasm and energy that he has given to this work in any
legitimate business, he might have been a well-to-do man to-day.

Colonel Murphy spoke as follows:--

 =Comrades of the Mexican war=:

 I am asked to give some recollections of the Mexican War, but little
 remains for me to say after the comprehensive and eloquent history of
 that war by Judge McKay, of South Carolina.

 It would be presumptuous of me, after what we have just heard from the
 Judge and Colonel Hungerford, to say another word. Larger gatherings
 this magnificent Hotel Continental has often had within its walls,
 for time has thinned the ranks of the Mexican veterans even more
 woefully than did Mexican shot and shell, but it may be doubted
 whether caravansary ever sheltered a party with more enthusiasm than
 is shown here to-night in Paris, the gay capital of France, by the few
 comrades gathered here to celebrate victories in which we were humble
 participants nearly 50 years ago.

 The thought of the days of 1847 helps me to feel young again, and
 brings vividly to my mind the gay, rollicking little army that marched
 out of Puebla on that bright August morning (alas! how many never to
 return), when General Scott left Puebla with his little army of 10,000
 men to fight an army of 35,000 veteran troops of Mexico, in trenches,
 in mountain gorges, fortified cities, surrounded by impassable
 marshes, your base, if you had any, hundreds of miles away, you faced
 the men that had showed the quality of their mercy at Mier and the
 Alamo. You felt that defeat meant death. ’Tis not becoming in soldiers
 to boast, but who, among all of you that assemble on this glorious
 anniversary, will not straighten up an inch taller when he says, “I
 was one of that little army.”

 Where is there one whose eyes will not flash when the glorious 20th
 of August is mentioned; when that little army fought five distinct
 battles--among them Contreras, San Antonio, Churubusco, San Puebla.
 Then came the 8th of September, that proud but sorrowful day, when you
 lost 900 out of 4,000 engaged. Then came Chapultepec, and the crowning
 event--our flag waving over the National Palace. The cathedraled City
 of Mexico at our feet; Popocatépetl, with its venerable summit of
 eternal snows, 18,000 feet above the sea, looks down upon us as it
 did upon Cortez three hundred years before, only its breezes kiss the
 folds of the new flag of America in place of the old flag of Castile.
 These memories are dear to us all, and I can think of no happier way
 of passing one day in the year than the old veterans meeting together
 and fighting their battles over again.

 Now, allow me to turn to what occurred under General Taylor, who
 commanded the little army of occupation on the northern line of
 operations. I will only refer to the Battle of Buena Vista, which was
 a glorious victory, and the last general battle and crowning glory of
 this brave little army. It will be recollected that General Santa Anna
 was so certain of a victory that he wrote to General Taylor saying,
 “you are surrounded by 20,000 men, and cannot in any human probability
 avoid suffering a rout and being cut to pieces with your troops, but
 as you deserve consideration and particular esteem, I wish to save
 you from a catastrophe,” and gave one hour from the arrival of his
 flag of truce to General Taylor to surrender. Old “rough and ready”
 did not require all the hour to respond. He wrote his memorable,
 but brief dispatch, “I decline acceding to your request.” But think
 of the situation; an army of 20,000 veteran soldiers, Santa Anna at
 their head, General Alvarez Chief of Cavalry, Lombardine of Infantry,
 Requena of Artillery, Villarnil of Engineers, with Vasquez, Torrejou,
 Ampudia, Andrade, Minon, Pacheco, Garcia, Ortega, Mejia, Flores,
 Gusman, Mora, Romero, and other dashing general officers, and to
 resist all this less than 5,000 American regulars and volunteers, and
 of regulars less than 500.

 On the morning of 22nd February, 1847, the Mexican cohort appeared
 on the distant hills, dense squadrons of horse, with glittering
 lances and gay pennons, forming the advance serried files of
 infantry, artillery, and cavalry, column after column in apparent
 endless massiveness followed, but it was Washington’s birthday, and
 General Taylor declined to surrender, and that meant hard fighting.
 The line of battle was formed by General Wool, General Taylor held
 Colonel Jefferson Davis (his son-in-law) with his Mississipi Rifles,
 Lieut.-Col. May’s Dragoons, the light batteries of Captains Sherman
 and Bragg, and Captain Steers’ squadron in reserve. General Lane
 moved forward with a section of Washington’s battery to arrest the
 advance of the army, but that enemy seemed invincible; before night
 the Mexicans had occupied the sides and scaled the summits of the
 Sierra Madre. That night our little army lay on their arms without
 fires, and long before daybreak were aroused from their slumbers to
 the tug of war; the day dawned bright, and beautiful skies unclouded,
 and mountain bathed in sunlight. Ampudia commenced the battle early,
 and at 8 o’clock Santa Anna had his main column in motion, at 11 he
 summoned General Taylor to surrender; the fortunes of the day seemed
 against us. Lieutenant O’Brien, whose name is so indelibly written
 on Buena Vista, maintained his ground until all his cannoniers were
 killed or wounded. Eight regiments of Mexican infantry fell upon
 the 2nd Illinois, and they were forced to take shelter. Braggs’ and
 sections of Sherman’s batteries had been ordered to their relief.
 Immense hosts of Mexican troops poured along the base of the mountain
 to the rear of the American line. Colonel Jefferson Davis hastened
 to meet them, the Mississipi Rifles went into action in double quick,
 and fired advancing, the front lines of the enemy seemed to melt
 before them: in the thickest of the fight Captain Bragg sent to Taylor
 for a supporting party, Taylor sent back the answer, “Major Bliss
 and I will support you.” He galloped to Braggs’ support, and there
 gave the celebrated order, “A little more grape, Captain Bragg.” The
 American line had been turned in the morning, but before night it was
 recovered. In the success of the battle Colonel Jefferson Davis justly
 claims a conspicuous part. Our little army of less than 5,000 men
 for more than 12 hours sustained this terrible fight against 20,000
 Mexican troops, and thus closed one of the most memorable battles of
 modern times.

 Mexico has fallen, the Stars and Stripes fly above the “Halls of the
 Montezumas”--a nation has been conquered. History records no deeds of
 greater daring, no triumphs of arms more brilliant. Empire was added
 to empire, 1,000,000 square miles of territory were acquired--three
 and a half times the area of France--a dwelling place for 100,000,000
 of freemen, won by half a hundred thousand. Until then much of the
 territory of the Mississipi-Missouri belonged to Mexico. Now the whole
 valley of one million five hundred thousand square miles, the river,
 with thirteen hundred navigable branches, running from its source five
 hundred miles to the north, cutting through its magnificent mountain
 gateway turning to the sea, running through territories and states,
 until sweetened by the breath of the olive and the orange, and finally
 received into the warm embrace of the tropical gulf, 5,000 miles from
 the land of the pine to the land of the palm, long enough to reach
 from the mouth of the Hudson to the mouth of the Nile. Add the empire
 drained by the Colorado, crown these with California--and all is ours,
 and won under the flag that now protects it.

 Judge McKay’s reference to Colonel A. W. Donophan and his famous march
 from Missouri to Mexico with Colonel Sterling Price reminds me of the
 ever-to-be-remembered passage from Brazos Santiago to New Orleans on
 the old Mississipi River a tow-boat of six hundred tons, the “Mary
 Kingsland,” on which I was one of the invalid passengers. We had
 crowded on that small vessel nearly 900 men of Colonel Donophan’s
 regiment, over 800 men of the 2nd Indiana (Colonel Bowles) and over
 100 sick men of other commands. Many of these men were down with
 yellow fever, of whom ten died during the five days’ passage, and were
 buried at sea. You may talk of the Black Hole of Calcutta, but I do
 not think it was any worse than the lower hold of that steamer, where
 we were obliged to lie packed together like sardines on square blocks
 of iron used as ballast, where the foul, stenchful bilge water came
 oozing up between these iron blocks. Then to add to our discomforts
 we had nothing to eat but the hardest kind of ship-biscuit that was
 impossible to masticate, and rotten, green measly pork and Rio coffee
 served out in the green bean. The stuff was so vile that we were often
 obliged to vomit after each meal, as we could not retain the putrid
 meat on our stomachs.

 The Government, no doubt, paid for sound pork, but in those days
 the Government contractors were principally gentlemen from the
 neighbourhood of Jerusalem, located at Cincinnati, who were not over
 scrupulous as to the kind of meat they supplied providing they got the
 money.

 I will never forget the horrors of that five days passage, and to
 add to our trouble, we experienced one of those terrible storms they
 called “northers” in that latitude, during which we very nearly
 foundered. You can imagine a small paddle-wheel river-steamboat of 600
 tons loaded down with nearly 2,000 men, 16 pieces of brass cannon,
 and thousands of Mexican lances, besides the rotten pork, Rio coffee,
 and the hardest kind of tack. The cannon and lances were captured
 by Colonel Donophan’s regiment at the Battles of Sacramento and San
 Jacinto, and comprised all the artillery the Mexicans had at these two
 fights.

 I am confident if this war occurred at the present day, we would
 have had a harder task to perform, as Mexico is possessed now of a
 well-disciplined army, splendidly officered and of very different
 materials, and trust we will always live in peace and friendly
 intercourse with our Mexican brothers, as should become all near-by
 neighbours and friends.

 Sherman and others, returning from the shores of our Western sea,
 joined in another march, from Atlanta, to our Eastern sea, and but for
 these, who can tell what would have been the result of our experiment
 of self-government, or where the boundary lines of the States of
 freedom would be drawn to-day. Milton says:

  “Peace hath her victories
  No less renowned than war,”

 and the men of peace who remained fought battles in the material
 world, with equal dangers requiring equal courage, and with results as
 supremely grand. The difficulties, dangers, and cost incident to the
 construction of the Central Pacific Railway were such as scarcely to
 be comprehended by men of to-day; its obstacles were simply appalling.
 The art of railway construction at that time was so far removed from
 its present advanced state that engineers looked upon the project with
 amazement, and capitalists with derision, its conception was so bold,
 so grand, so stupendous, so startling, as to fill the incredulous even
 with admiration. Bonaparte’s crossing of the Alps with his army and
 artillery is dwarfed into tameness when compared with the achievement
 which made this the highway of nations and the “rapid transit” of
 the world’s commerce. In the autumn of 1849, the very month that
 California was organised as a territory, a Pacific Railroad Convention
 was held. On May 1, 1852, the Legislature of California passed “an
 Act granting the right of way to the United States for a railroad to
 connect the navigable waters of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans for
 the purposes of national safety in the event of war, and to promote
 the highest interests of the Republic, pronounced one of the greatest
 necessities of the age.” A Senator, upon the floor of Congress,
 said: “I look upon the building of the railroad from the waters of
 the Missouri to the Pacific Ocean, at the time particularly in which
 it was built during the war, as perhaps the greatest achievement of
 the human race on earth.” Let us honour the builders with a simple
 moment’s consideration. Engineer Colonel O. M. Poe, in his report to
 General Sherman, said: “An army of workmen were employed, 25,000 men
 and 6,000 teams, and the route presented a busy scene. The woods rang
 with the strokes of the axe, and the quarries with the click of steel;
 the streams were bordered with lumbermen’s camps and choked with
 floating logs, and materials, supplies, and equipment for the Central
 Pacific were scattered from New York _via_ Cape Horn and San Francisco
 to the end of the track advancing eastward.” The base of supplies of
 the Central Pacific from the Eastern Rolling Mills, by the way of Cape
 Horn to the track layers, was equal to the circuit of the globe on the
 parallel of the road. This distance was so great as to keep materials
 to the value of millions of dollars, and sufficient for nearly a
 year’s construction, constantly in transit. In cutting the Sierras,
 miles of snow and rock were tunneled; snow slides and avalanches
 destroyed many lives and large amounts of property. To hasten the work
 of piercing the Sierras, three locomotives, forty cars, rails, and
 track material for forty miles of railroad were hauled on sleds by
 oxen and horses over the summits of that Alpine range and down into
 the cañon of the Truckee River. This over a pass in which the annual
 average snowfall was forty feet and the depth of hard settled snow
 in midwinter was eighteen feet on the level. Who at this distance
 appreciates the stupendous work of these Titans? From the Truckee to
 the Bear River in Utah, the inhabitants did not average one to each
 ten miles. With the exception of a few cords of stunted pine and
 juniper, all the fuel had to be hauled from the Sierras. For over five
 hundred miles there was not a tree that would make a board or tie.
 Fortunes were expended in boring for water and in laying pipes, in
 some instances over eight miles in length, to convey water to the line
 of the road.

 Upon this desert stretch, as far as from Boston to Buffalo, there was
 nothing that entered into the superstructure of a railroad, not even
 good stone, and water for men and animals was hauled at times for
 forty miles. The cost of supplies was fabulous; oats and barley for
 the animals cost from $200 to $280 per ton, and hay $120. But, as
 with Grant at Vicksburg and at the Wilderness, the work went on, the
 road was completed, and it was California Pioneers who did it, and who
 made the road they built their monument, and “success” their epitaph.
 Senator Benton said his dream was “to see a train of cars thundering
 down the Eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains, bearing in transit
 to Europe the teas, silks, and spices of the Orient.” His dream is
 practically realised, as there are seven trans-continental lines
 bearing this commerce to the Atlantic.

 The Pioneer has left other material legacies to the nation. The great
 American Deserts you knew will soon be blotted from our maps. By
 the science of civilization large tracts of these have been made to
 “blossom like the rose,” rivers that ran to waste now work the mine,
 turn the wheel, and then with the artesian flow irrigate the desert
 wastes, until fruitful gardens have grown like sweet dreams along the
 trail where comrades of ours died of damning thirst.

 We all love the sweet flowery land we knew as territory, then as the
 new, and now the dear old State. We remember with becoming pride
 our first votes. California came into the Union a Free State. How
 controlling this action was none knew, nor when viewed in the light
 of the history of the Rebellion can it be measured. California
 became a gem in the Federal coronet. The pen of Bishop Berkley must
 have pointed toward it when he wrote his epigrammatic expression,
 “Ho! westward Empire takes its way.” It is a sunny land, and merits
 the sobriquet, “Italy of America,” with its clear skies, charms of
 climate, wonderful soils, wealth of mines, fabulous products and
 enchantments of scenery, crowned with the Yosemite Falls, the highest
 in the world, descending in three leaps 2,500 feet, or one-half a
 mile, from the glaciers and eternal snows of the Sierras to the valley
 below, a very Eden of sublimity and loveliness, perhaps the most
 wondrously grand and beautiful spot on the earth. To stand for an hour
 upon a summit crest of the Sierras, the grandest of America’s Alpine
 ranges; to live a day amid their icy homes; to descend their western
 slopes; to trace their long summit lines of snow-clad peaks that link
 Oregon to Aztec Mexico; to walk where a single step takes you from
 the glacier ice to Spring’s resurrection, where the violets greet you
 with sweetest smiles through dewy tears of joy, born on the spot where
 the snows of yesterday were melted by the morning’s sun; the great
 pines and sequoia gigantea, those wonders of the world’s forests,
 in whose branches the birds chorused their matin songs centuries
 before the Christian era, towering below you; the silvery lines of
 the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers mirroring hundreds of miles of
 the great central valley, reaching far North and South from the Bay
 of San Francisco; the Coast Range alone curtaining the Pacific Sea,
 with stern old Mount Diablo standing as the sole sentinel guarding the
 Golden gate--these are alone worth crossing a continent to see--and
 recall the words of Tom Moore, who, after visiting the mountains of
 New England, the rivers and lakes of New York, the St. Lawrence and
 grand old Niagara, wrote to Lady Charlotte Rowdon, saying:

  “Oh, Lady, these are miracles which man,
  Caged in the bonds of Europe’s pigmy plan,
  Can scarce dream of, and which the eye must see
  To know how beautiful this world can be.”

 Pity he could not have seen and sung of our lands of the Yellowstone,
 the Columbia, and the Yosemite,--what words would these have inspired
 his poet pen to write.

 Among the gentlemen who have honored us with their presence here
 to-night as one of our guests I notice my friend the Honorable Felix
 Campbell, Member of Congress from Brooklyn, and who is now the Dean
 of the delegation to the Congress of the United States from the
 great State of New York, and who has been honored with many many
 re-elections to that body; his presence here to-night is particularly
 welcome to us old soldiers of the Mexican War, for we all remember the
 active part he took in helping to secure the passage of our pension
 bill a few years ago.

 I must also not forget to mention the name of my old friend and
 fellow forty-niner of California, James Phelan, Esq., of San
 Francisco to whose generosity we are mainly indebted for this splendid
 entertainment to-night, whose patriotic spirit and warm-hearted nature
 always come to the front on such occasions. May his shadow never grow
 less, and that he may never die till I kill him.

 As allusion has been made to the war of the rebellion, in which
 comrade McKay took a most prominent part on the side of the South,
 and Colonel Hungerford and myself serving in the Union Army. Although
 _South Carolina_ and _New York troops fought side by side in the
 same brigade under the gallant General Shields in Mexico_, we found
 ourselves, _unfortunately_, arrayed against each other in later years
 in our own country, and _no man who is a man_ will from _political_ or
 _personal_ motives _keep alive the passions of the war_, or by fanning
 the embers of sectional hatred for _political_ or _partisan effect_,
 subject our people to the charge of vindictive malignity. I trust we
 have long since forgotten the bitter memories of our Civil War, and
 that we only remember the _gallant acts_ and _deeds_ of _both armies_.

 I have hoped for years back that the time would come, and it is
 happily now at hand, when the brave soldiers of the society of the
 army of Northern Virginia, who fought under the gallant Lee, will
 meet side by side at the annual reunions with the soldiers of our
 society of the army of the Potomac, who fought under McClellan, Grant,
 Meade, and Sheridan, and at other festive meetings of our various army
 gatherings and organizations of old soldiers, where I have never heard
 a word said against, but the highest praise accorded to our gallant
 but misguided southern brothers for their bravery and daring on the
 battlefield.

Colonel Murphy was called upon to respond to the last sentiment,--in
memory of our dead comrades,--which he did, as follows:

I am called on to say a word to the memory of our dear departed
comrades. Would that I had command of language to do justice to our
dead heroes. Father Time has fearfully thinned our ranks, and few of us
can point to the comrade who was his file leader and marched shoulder
to shoulder with us nearly 50 years ago, and the death roll since the
Mexican War has been frightful among the distinguished men of that army
who have been called to their final account. I mention a few, Scott,
Taylor, Pillow, Quitman, Twiggs, Duncan, Pierce, Kearney, Hancock,
Shields. The last named general, and the last surviving general of that
war, was a welcome guest at my house a few years ago when stricken with
a fatal sickness when far away from his Western home and kindred. I
well remember the gallant Lieutenant Ralph Bell of the South Carolina
Regiment, mentioned by comrade McKay, and who, while wounded, led the
forlorn hope at Chapultepec. He accompanied me to California in 1849,
and his eyes I closed in death at Sacramento City the following year,
and whose placid countenance looks down upon me here to-night. These
are sad memories, and the tongue can but feebly express the feelings
of the heart at this time; our own bent forms and fast becoming hoary
locks admonish us that it will not be long before we too are called to
tread the same path, and no matter what our former condition in life,
there is no distinction then. The dead, how beautiful is the memory of
the dead, what a holy thing it is in the human heart, what a chastening
influence it has upon human life, how it subdues all the harshness
that grows up within us in the daily intercourse with the world, how
it melts our hardness and softens our pride, kindles our deepest love,
and waking our brightest aspirations in the camp and by the wayside, in
solitude or among our comrades, think sadly and speak lovingly of the
dead.

It occurred to the compiler of this pamphlet that it would not be
out of place to mention the name of Colonel Murphy’s son, Ignatius,
a well-known journalist and editorial writer, who wrote the life of
Colonel Hungerford (a book of nearly 400 pages). This gallant soldier
recently died in Rome, Italy, at the home of his daughter, the Countess
Telfener, at the Villa Ada, attaining the ripe age of seventy-five
years. He passed peacefully away, surrounded by his affectionate wife,
his daughter, the Countess, and his numerous grandchildren.

Ignatius Ingoldsby Murphy deserves more than a mere honourable mention
in connection with the corn propaganda. When his father commenced
his missionary labors, in 1887, he was flooded with correspondence from
all parts of Europe. This son, who was a third year naval cadet at
Annapolis, resigned, and came over to Europe to assist his father, for
which his knowledge of European languages eminently qualified him.

[Illustration: IGNATIUS INGOLDSBY MURPHY

CADET 1st CLASS, UNITED STATES

NAVAL ACADEMY, ANNAPOLIS, MD., U.S.A.]

When his father was ordered from Berlin to Russia, by General Rusk,
at the request of the Grand Duke Sergius, the uncle of the present
Emperor, the Secretary of Agriculture appointed him as special agent
and secretary to take his father’s place in Germany, and much of the
success of this propaganda is fairly attributable to his valuable
assistance, together with that of Colonel Murphy’s wife, who recently
died in Brussels. This extraordinary and gifted woman gave the last
fifteen of the best years of her life to this work; in fact her whole
life, no less than her pen has been devoted to the welfare of others.
The two daughters also worked together with the same energy and
enthusiasm as their father, for no one man could have accomplished such
phenomenal work in so short a time.

The exports of our American corn (maize) was only 24,000,000 bushels of
56 lbs. each in 1888, less than four per cent. of our production. The
year after the commencement of this propaganda, which Colonel Murphy
undertook on his own initiative and sole expense, unaided by anyone,
the exports went up rapidly, and in 1901 were over 213 million bushels,
and every acre of land on the corn belt has doubled in value in the
last fifteen years. This result proves the value of the work done by
this propaganda in showing the people of Europe the value of maize as
human food, which was formerly only considered as fit food for animals.
This family deserves a place on the roll of grateful remembrance.

[Illustration: ear of corn]




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious errors in punctuation and spelling have been fixed.

Page 14: “El Penon” changed to “El Peñón”

Page 15: “Cherubusco” changed to “Churubusco” and “Charlet Bent”
changed to “Charles Bent”

Page 17: “tete-dupont” changed to “tête de pont”

Page 18, 20 & 21: “Belen” changed to “Belén”

Page 21: “ordinance, quartermaster and commissionary” changed to
“ordnance, quartermaster and commissary”

Page 22: “July 4th, 1828” changed to “July 4th, 1848”

Page 25: “will aways be among” changed to “will always be among” and
“the the misdeeds” changed to “the misdeeds”

Page 26: “perhaps unparalled” changed to “perhaps unparalleled”

Page 28: “would would not be out of place” changed to “would not be out
of place”

Page 29: “tban can be” changed to “than can be”

Page 30: “presumptious in me” changed to “presumptuous of me” and
“whether caravansery” changed to “whether caravansary”

Page 31: “Cherubusco” changed to “Churubusco”; “Popocatopeth” changed
to “Popocatépetl” and “last General battle” changed to “last general
battle”

Page 32: “son-is law” changed to “son-in-law”

Page 34: “ship-buiscuit” changed to “ship-biscuit”

Page 35: “on the peninsular” changed to “on the peninsula”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONDENSED HISTORY OF THE
MEXICAN WAR AND ITS GLORIOUS RESULTS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
